---
title: 'Taxonomy.jl: A Julia package to handle the NCBI Taxonomy database'
tags:
  - Julia
  - taxonomy
  - NCBI
  - database
  - bioinformatics
  - ecology
authors:
  - name: Hiroki Ban
    orcid: 0000-0002-7563-7693
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Hiroyuki Ogata
    corresponding: true
    orcid: 0000-0001-6594-377X
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto, 611-0011, Japan 
   index: 1
date: 19 November 2022
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

`Taxonomy.jl` is a Julia [@bezanson2017julia] package to handle the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Taxonomy database. `Taxonomy.jl` provides a rich and comprehensive set of tools for the manipuliation of NCBI Taxonomy data. This package is designed not only for efficient data manipulation, but also for flexible interactive analysis (e.g. on Jupyter notebook [@kluyver2016jupyter]), and for integration with other Julia ecosystems such as `DataFrames.jl` [@dataframes].

`Taxonomy.jl` is an open-source project hosted on Github and distributed under the MIT license.

# Statement of need

The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Taxonomy is a nomenclature and classification database for the International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) [@schoch2020ncbi]. It provides organism names and classifications for every entry in the nucleotide and protein sequence databases of the INSDC and allows linking between different resources. Linking taxa and sequence data is foundational for various fields from biomedical to ecological studies.

With the development of affordable sequencing platforms, many genetic and genomic sequences are being produced. The amount of data generated by a single study, particularly metagenome analysis, is exploding, creating a need for tools that can handle the taxonomy database with lightweight performance and scalability.

`Taxonomy.jl` is a Julia package to work with the NCBI Taxonomy database. Julia is a language suitable for scientific purposes as it is high-performance with good scalability (similar to C or Fortran), yet highly flexible and readable. Like Python and R, Julia also has a REPL (read, evaluate, print, loop) environment for interactive use. Julia is a relatively young programming language, but it has a growing ecosystem such as `DataFrames.jl` for general data analysis, as well as communities aiming for biological data such as BioJulia and EcoJulia. `Taxonomy.jl` provides efficient native access to the NCBI Taxonomy database in Julia. These features are suitable for integration with the Julia ecosystem and the interactive analysis ecosystems, for example, the Jupyter ecosystem.

Community composition analyses, including metagenomics, use tables that represent the relative abundance of each taxon. In the NCBI Taxonomy, superkingdom, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species, subspecies, and strain are used as canonical ranks. However, there are many exceptions to this. For example, kingdom applies only to eukaryotes; lineages, including those of viruses and environmental samples, often lack some ranks; there is a mixture of subspecies and strains in ranks below species; there are many taxa that do not have canonical ranks. Therefore, the NCBI Taxonomy lineages often cannot be used as-is. However, standardization of lineage is supported by only a few tools, such as `Taxonkit` [@shen2021taxonkit]. In `Taxonomy.jl`, this standardization is provided by the `Lineage` type.

# Features

## In-memory offline queries with `Taxonomy.DB`

Taxon data is manipulated by querying a database of parent-child relationships and their annotations by taxon identifiers or names. This can be accomplished in two ways either: by accessing the database via a web application programming interface (API), or by directly parsing the dump files provided by NCBI (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/). Some tools, including the command-line interface (CLI) tool `E-utilities` [@sayers2010general] and the R package `Taxize` [@chamberlain2013taxize], access the data through a web API. This is convenient for processing a small number of queries, but is not suitable for large queries due to the limited speed of Internet connections. Moreover, NCBI requests that users submit no more than three query requests per second through the Entrez API, and cautions that IP blocking may be used to protect access to community resources. Therefore, `Taxonomy.jl` employs an approach similar to the Python package `Taxopy` [@antonio_camargo_2022_7010602] and the CLI tool `Taxonkit` [@shen2021taxonkit], which parse the dump files directly and load them into random access memory (RAM). The dump files are small enough for modern computers (about 400MB total) to be entirely loaded in RAM, allowing queries to run in real-time. This approach also has a speed advantage over the file-based approach used by the `NCBITaxa` module of the Python package `ETE` [@huerta2016ete], which creates SQLite database from the dump files.

## Accessing taxonomies

`Taxonomy.jl` provides a convenient set of types and functions to query the database and store the obtained information. Two types are provided, `Taxonomy.DB` and `Taxon`. The `Taxonomy.DB` type represents the taxonomy database and stores all data parsed from the dump files in RAM. The `Taxon` type represents a single taxon in the database. It stores a taxonomic identifier (Taxid) and a reference to the database.

The `Taxonomy.DB` object is created as follows by specifying the paths to `nodes.dmp` (linking the Taxids to taxonomic ranks and parent Taxids) and `names.dmp` (linking the Taxids to taxonomy names) in the file downloaded from the NCBI FTP site:

```julia
julia> using Taxonomy

julia> db = Taxonomy.DB("./db/nodes.dmp", "./db/names.dmp");
```

Once a database object is created, it can be called without explicitly specifying it. Most analyses use only one database, and so this approach allows users to write simple, readable code. For example, users can omit the database argument when constructing the `Taxon` object as follows:

```julia
julia> Taxon(9606, db)
9606 [species] Homo sapiens

julia> Taxon(9606)
9606 [species] Homo sapiens
```

The following operations are defined as functions with `Taxon` or `Taxonomy.DB`:
- `name`, `rank`, `AbstractTrees.parent`, `chirdren`, etc.: Get various information on a given taxon (name, rank, parent-child relationships, etc.)
- `name2taxids`: Convert a name to Taxids
- `lca`: Compute the lowest common ancestor (LCA) of given taxa
- `isancestor` and `isdescendant`: Evaluate ancestor-descendant relationships between two taxa
- `isless` (`<`) with `CanonicalRank` type: Filter taxa by a rank range

## Traversing taxonomic tree

The hierarchical structure of the NCBI Taxonomy is organized as a rooted tree with each taxon as a node. Therefore, the `Taxonomy.DB` type can also be viewed as a rooted tree with the `Taxon` type as a node. We implemented an interface to handle the tree structures using `AbstractTrees.jl`. This allows users to use the functions defined in `AbstractTrees.jl`, as in the example below, and to traverse the tree in a user-defined way.

```julia
julia> AbstractTrees.print_tree(Taxon(207598))
207598 [subfamily] Homininae
├─ 9596 [genus] Pan
│  ├─ 9597 [species] Pan paniscus
│  └─ 9598 [species] Pan troglodytes
│     ├─ 37011 [subspecies] Pan troglodytes troglodytes
│     ├─ 37010 [subspecies] Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii
│     ├─ 756884 [subspecies] Pan troglodytes ellioti
│     ├─ 1294088 [subspecies] Pan troglodytes verus x troglodytes
│     └─ 37012 [subspecies] Pan troglodytes verus
├─ 9605 [genus] Homo
│  ├─ 2665952 [no rank] environmental samples
│  │  └─ 2665953 [species] Homo sapiens environmental sample
│  ├─ 2813598 [no rank] unclassified Homo
│  │  └─ 2813599 [species] Homo sp.
│  ├─ 9606 [species] Homo sapiens
│  │  ├─ 741158 [subspecies] Homo sapiens subsp. 'Denisova'
│  │  └─ 63221 [subspecies] Homo sapiens neanderthalensis
│  └─ 1425170 [species] Homo heidelbergensis
└─ 9592 [genus] Gorilla
   ├─ 9593 [species] Gorilla gorilla
   │  ├─ 183511 [subspecies] Gorilla gorilla uellensis
   │  ├─ 406788 [subspecies] Gorilla gorilla diehli
   │  └─ 9595 [subspecies] Gorilla gorilla gorilla
   └─ 499232 [species] Gorilla beringei
      ├─ 46359 [subspecies] Gorilla beringei graueri
      └─ 1159185 [subspecies] Gorilla beringei beringei
```

## Resolving rank clashes

`Taxonomy.jl` provides a `Lineage` type, an interface to lineage information. The `Lineage` type is a subtype of the `AbstractVector` type and can be treated as a Vector with `Taxon` elements. The `getindex` methods of the `Lineage` type are extended to also access `Taxon` using the rank symbol. The subspecies/strain are internally treated as the same rank, so that users can ignore ambiguities in each lineage. This makes it possible to consistently handle lineage information.

In addition, `Taxonomy.jl` provides a `reformat` function to convert a `Lineage` to the given rank e.g., the 7-level format (superkingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species) or 8-level format with an additional strain/subspecies rank. If there is no taxon corresponding to a rank in the lineage, the `UnclassifiedTaxon` object (such as "unclassified Bacillales family") referring to the taxon at a higher rank will be stored. This standardization allows multiple lineages to have consistent ranks.

The `Lineage` type can be converted to the `NamedTuple` type with rank as the key via the `namedtuple` function. This `NamedTuple` can be used as input to a `DataFrame` type in `DataFrames.jl`, for example, allowing for downstream analysis and visualization.

# Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Russell Y. Neches for critical reading of an earlier version of this manuscript. This work was supported by JST, the establishment of university fellowships towards the creation of science technology innovation, Grant Number JPMJFS2123. The design of `Taxonomy.jl` has been inspired by the CLI tool `Taxonkit`.

# References
